---
layout: post
title:  "a sxmo inspired rethinking of my dotfiles and also a proof of concept for a new structuring of sxmo-utils"
---

# WIP!

#### Introduction
After sieving through the sxmo-utils, i started thinking about the structure of sxmo and how the scripts are executed and loaded, which lead me into a journey of rethinking my own dotfiles, i'll talk about that in detail in this blogpost. i've rewritten the filepaths and -names to fit in the context of sxmo.

## abstract
why? to simplify customizing, unclutter the code with unnecessary calls and configs, more reusability and the ease of just being able to  overwrite any function by just putting it in ~/.functions or maybe even a .sxmorc?

also to make sxmo-utils readable, configurable and make packaging easier. because of things like the `.profile` the package installer would only need to cp the sxmo files and only 1 /etc/profile.d/sxmo.sh. that would be all the setup necessary.

everything is a function! :D

## content
* part i: profile
* part ii: magic run_function
* part iii: conclusion, the why and PROs/CONs


## PART I: /etc/profiles.d/ and the .profile
### the one place the configure everything
to have systemwide access to the functions i decided to go for /etc/profile.d/. when you put a script in there it gets source on login, but only once, so if you change anything there you have to relogin.
```sh
-> % cat /etc/profile.d/sxmo.sh
#!/usr/bin/env sh
. /usr/share/sxmo/.profile
```
## PART II: magic run_function
### so our functions are sourced via .profile everything should just work, right? no!
a problem i immediatly encountered is that the .profile isnt sourced in a non-interactive shell.
which means, running following commands won't work without sourcing the profile again, as seen below.
also programs like dmenu, sxkhdm, xinit and so on, can't run those functions nicely without sourcing the .profile.
to illustrate this point better and also for debugging i introduced the [hello]() function.

```sh
-> % which hello
hello () {
        echo "hello world! you are running a"
        case $- in
                (*i*) echo "interactive" ;;
                (*) echo "non-interactive" ;;
        esac
        tty | grep -q "tty" && echo "tty / (?)login shell" || echo "non-login shell"
}

-> % hello
hello world! you are running a
interactive
non-login shell

-> % sh -c hello
sh: row 1: hello: command not found

-> % sh -c ". $DOTFILES/.functions; hello"
hello world! you are running a
non-interactive
non-login shell

-> % sh -ic "hello"
hello world! you are running a
interactive
non-login shell
```
as you see in the example above `sh -c hello` throws a command not found error, because it is a non-interactive shell.
the command only works when you source the `.functions` again before running the command `sh -c ". $DOTFILES/.functions; hello"`.
similar `sh -ic hello` runs as expected because -i forces interactive shell. this is a problem because in some cases like .xinitrc, dmenu, sxhkd and probably many more, it is not clean to force an interactive shell or source our `.functions` again in each of these cases, so our function will fail.

i dont like sourcing files over and over again, so i came up with, what i think is, a rather clever solution.
first of all i created a bin directory in /usr/share/sxmo which i put into the $PATH in `.profile` so binaries there are found.
binaries can be executed also in a non-interactive context and with this magical
[run_function](https://github.com/dni/dotfiles/blob/sxmo/scripts/run_function) script and symlinks to it, it is
possible to simply run any of our defined functions in a non-interactive way and sourcing is done inside the run_function.

#### [run_function](https://github.com/dni/dotfiles/blob/sxmo/scripts/run_function)
```sh
#!/usr/bin/env sh

# this file is useful for running functions in a non-interactive shell
# (dmenu, xinit, sxhkd). so we need to source our functions here and
# run them, else we end in an infinite loop. functions are not sourced
# in a non-interactive shell so we create symlinks to this script
# in the $PATH and source the profile.

# source .profile with functions and eval
# symlinked binaries in the $PATH are overwritten by the function calls
. "$DOTFILES"/.profile
eval "${0##*/}"
```

#### [create_binaries](https://github.com/dni/dotfiles/blob/sxmo/scripts/utils.sh#L18)
the symlinks are regenerated by calling the function
```sh
# populate ./bin/ with symlink to the magic run_function script
create_binaries() {
  rm "$DOTFILES"/bin/*
  get_functions | while read -r x; do
    ln -sf "$DOTFILES"/scripts/run_function "$DOTFILES"/bin/"$x"
  done
}
```
now after running `create_binaries` function and sourcing, our non working command now runs just fine everywhere, everytime, hopefully :).

```sh
-> % sh -c hello
hello world! you are running a
non-interactive
non-login shell
```

## PART III: Conclusion, the why and PROs/CONs
### Now? everything is fine? right?
Very probably, i still have some concerns i need to evaluate and im hoping for a feedback from the sxmo people.

Obviously, there is a reason for a non-interactive and an interactive enviroment and why the `.profile` is not
sourced in a non-interactive enviroment. That is, to have a clean enviroment when running in a non-interactive shell
and to not run the risk to somehow break the clean non-interactive enviroment with our .profile. still it is unclear to
me what the risk really is someone would need to assess it, probably, my gut feeling is even when it goes wrong it is not that bad.

that said i still think the PROs heavily outweights the CONs. Especially because the whole concept of sxmo is to
run everything with shell scripts so there is a very good reason to also be able to run scripts in a non-interactive way.

## But WHY? why is this even relevant, what are the benefits of it?
Glad you asked :D
* now every smxo script could just be a shell function
* accessing scripts/functions through .profile interactivly, and non-interactivly through $PATH=sxmo/bin and also in a login shell
this helps a lot with building package the make file doesnt need to take care anymore of putting the sxmo script into /usr/bin directory because the are just run via the magic run_function

## proof of concept and dotfiles reworking done, what's next?


# Links

* [dotfiles](https://github.com/dni/dotfiles/tree/sxmo)
* [run_function](https://github.com/dni/dotfiles/blob/sxmo/scripts/run_function)
* IRC: #sxmo on irc.oftc.net
